# Results

## The Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas Portal

In March of 2022, the Childhood Cancer Data Lab launched the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas (ScPCA) Portal to make uniformly processed, summarized single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data and de-identified metadata from pediatric tumor samples available for download.
Data available on the Portal was obtained using two different mechanisms: raw data was accepted from ALSF-funded investigators and processed using our open-source pipeline `scpca-nf`, or investigators processed their raw data using `scpca-nf` and submitted the output for inclusion on the Portal.

All samples on the Portal include a core set of metadata obtained from investigators, including age, sex, diagnosis, subdiagnosis (if applicable), tissue location, and disease stage.
Some investigators submitted additional metadata, such as treatment and tumor stage, which can also be found on the Portal.
All submitted metadata was standardized to maintain consistency across projects before adding to the Portal.
In addition to providing a human-readable value for the submitted metadata, we also provide an ontology term identifier, if applicable.
Submitted metadata was mapped to an associated ontology term identifiers obtained from HsapDV (age) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hsapdv], PATO (sex) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/pato], NCBI taxonomy (organism) [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy], MONDO (disease) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/mondo], UBERON (tissue) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/uberon], and Hancestro (ethnicity, if applicable) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hancestro].
With these ontology term identifiers for each sample provides, users have access to standardized metadata terms that facilitate comparing datasets to one another within the Portal as well as to data from other research projects.

The Portal contains data from 500 samples and over 50 tumor types.
<!-- TODO: Update numbers -->
Figure {@fig:fig1}A summarizes all samples from patient tumors or patient-derived xenografts currently available on the Portal.
The total number of samples for each diagnosis is shown, along with a breakdown of the proportion of samples from each disease stage within a diagnosis group.
Most samples found on the Portal were obtained from patients with leukemia (n = 192).
The Portal also includes samples from brain and central nervous system tumors (n = 154), sarcoma and soft tissue tumors (n = 68), and a variety of other solid tumors (n = 87).
Most samples were collected at initial diagnosis (n = 424), with a smaller number of samples collected either at recurrence (n = 64), during progressive disease (n = 10), or post-mortem (n = 2).
Along with the patient tumors, the Portal contains a small number of human tumor cell line samples (n = 4).


Each of the available samples contains summarized gene expression data from either single-cell or single-nuclei RNA sequencing.
However, some samples also include additional data, such as quantified expression data from tagging cells with Antibody-derived tags (ADT), like CITE-seq antibodies [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4380], or multiplexing samples with hashtag oligonucleotides (HTO) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1] prior to sequencing.
Out of the 500 samples, 96 have associated CITE-seq data, and 19 have associated multiplexing data.
In some cases, multiple libraries from the same sample were collected for additional sequencing, either for bulk RNA-seq or spatial transcriptomics.
Specifically, 118 samples on the Portal were sequenced using bulk RNA-seq and 94 samples were sequenced using spatial transcriptomics.
A summary of the number of samples with each additional modality is shown in Figure {@fig:fig1}B, and a detailed summary of the total samples with each sequencing method broken down by project is available in Supplemental Table 1.

Samples on the Portal are organized by project, where each project is a collection of similar samples from an individual lab.
Users can filter projects based on diagnosis, included modalities (e.g., CITE-seq, bulk RNA-seq), 10X Genomics version (e.g., 10Xv2, 10Xv3), and whether or not a project includes samples derived from patient-derived xenografts or cell lines.
The project card displays an abstract, the total number of samples included, a list of diagnoses for all samples included in the Project, and links to any external information associated with the project, such as publications and links to external data, such as SRA or GEO (Figure {@fig:fig1}C).
The project card also indicates the type(s) of sequencing performed, including the 10X Genomics kit version, the suspension type (cell or nucleus), and if additional sequencing is present, like bulk RNA-seq or multiplexing.

## Uniform processing of data available on the ScPCA Portal

All data available on the Portal was uniformly processed using [`scpca-nf`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf), an open-source and efficient Nextflow [@url:https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/index.html] workflow for quantifying single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data.
Using Nextflow as the backbone for the `scpca-nf` workflow ensures both reproducibility and portability.
All dependencies for the workflow are handled automatically, as each process in the workflow is run in a Docker container.
Nextflow is compatible with various computing environments, including high-performance computing and cloud-based computing, allowing users to run the workflow in their preferred environment.
Setup requires organizing input files and updating a single configuration file for your computing environment after installing Nextflow and either Docker or Singularity.
Nextflow will also handle parallelizing sample processing as allowed by your environment, minimizing run time.
The combination of being able to execute a Nextflow workflow in any environment and run individual processes in Docker containers makes this workflow easily portable for external use.

When building `scpca-nf`, we sought a fast and memory-efficient tool for gene expression quantification to minimize processing costs.
We expected many users of the Portal to have their own single-cell or single-nuclei data processed with Cell Ranger [@url:https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger/latest], due to its popularity.
Thus, selecting a tool with comparable results to Cell Ranger was also desirable.
In comparing `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] to Cell Ranger, we found `alevin-fry` had a lower run time and memory usage (Figure {@fig:figs1}A), while retaining comparable mean gene expression for all genes (Figure {@fig:figs1}B), total UMIs per cell (Figure {@fig:figs1}C),  and total genes detected per cell (Figure {@fig:figs1}D).
(All analyses comparing gene expression quantification tools are available in a public analysis repository [@url:https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/alsf-scpca].)
Based on these results, we elected to use `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] in `scpca-nf` to quantify gene expression data.

`scpca-nf` takes FASTQ files as input (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
Reads are aligned using the selective alignment option in `salmon alevin` to an index with transcripts corresponding to spliced cDNA and intronic regions, denoted by `alevin-fry` as a `splici` index.
The output from `alevin-fry` includes a gene by cell count matrix for all barcodes identified, even those that may not contain true cells.
This unfiltered counts matrix is stored in a `SingleCellExperiment` object [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0654-x] and output from the workflow to an R Data Serialization format (`.rds`) file with the suffix `_unfiltered.rds`.

`scpca-nf` performs filtering of empty droplets, removal of low-quality cells, normalization, dimensionality reduction, and cell type annotation (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
The unfiltered gene by cell counts matrices are filtered to remove any barcodes that are not likely to contain cells using `DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger()`[@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1662-y], and all cells that pass are saved in a `SingleCellExperiment` object and `.rds` file with the suffix `_filtered.rds`.
Then, low-quality cells are identified and removed with `miQC` [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009290], which jointly models the proportion of mitochondrial reads and detected genes per cell and calculates a probability that each cell is compromised.
The remaining cells' counts are normalized [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0947-7] and undergo dimensionality reduction using both principal component analysis (PCA) and UMAP.
Finally, cell types are classified using two automated methods, `SingleR`[@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y] and `CellAssign`[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1].
The results from this analysis are stored in a processed `SingleCellExperiment` object saved to an `.rds` file with the suffix `_processed.rds`.

To make downloading from the Portal convenient for R and Python users, downloads are available as either `SingleCellExperiment` or `AnnData`[@doi:10.1101/2021.12.16.473007] objects.
`scpca-nf` converts all `SingleCellExperiment` objects saved as `.rds` files to `AnnData` objects, which are saved as Hierarchical Data Format (`.hdf5`) files (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
Downloads contain the unfiltered, filtered, and processed objects from `scpca-nf` to allow users to choose to perform their own filtering and normalization or to start their analysis from a processed object.

All downloads from the Portal include a quality control (QC) report with a summary of processing information (e.g., `alevin-fry` version), library statistics (e.g., the total number of cells), and a collection of diagnostic plots for each library (Figure {@fig:fig2}B-G).
The knee plot includes all droplets (i.e., before removing empty droplets) sorted based on the total number of UMIs, and those retained after filtering empty droplets are indicated in the plot (Figure {@fig:fig2}B).
For each cell that remains after filtering empty droplets, the number of total UMIs, genes detected, and mitochondrial reads are calculated and summarized in a scatter plot (Figure {@fig:fig2}C).
We include plots showing the `miQC` model and which cells are kept and removed after filtering with `miQC` (Figure {@fig:fig2}D-E).
A UMAP plot with cells colored by the total number of genes detected and a faceted UMAP plot where cells are colored by the expression of a top highly variable gene are also available (Figure {@fig:fig2}F-G).


## Processing samples with additional modalities

`scpca-nf` includes modules for processing samples with sequencing modalities beyond single-cell or single-nuclei RNA-seq data: corresponding ADT or CITE-seq data [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4380], multiplexed data via cell hashing [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1], spatial transcriptomics, or bulk RNA-seq.

### Antibody-derived tags

To process ADT libraries, the ADT FASTQ files were provided as input into `scpca-nf` and quantified using `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` (Figure {@fig:figs2}A).
Along with the FASTQ files, `scpca-nf` takes a tab-separated values (TSV) file with one row for each ADT – containing the name used for the ADT and associated barcode – required to build an ADT-specific index for quantifying ADT expression with `alevin-fry`.
The output from `alevin-fry` is the unfiltered ADT by cell counts matrix.
The ADT by cell counts matrix is read into R alongside the gene by cell counts matrix and saved as an alternative experiment (`altExp`) within the main `SingleCellExperiment` object containing the unfiltered RNA counts.
This `SingleCellExperiment` object containing both RNA and ADT counts is output from the workflow to an `.rds` file with the suffix `_unfiltered.rds`.

`scpca-nf` does not filter any cells based on ADT expression or remove cells with low-quality ADT expression.
Any cells removed after filtering empty droplets based on the unfiltered RNA counts matrix are also removed from the ADT counts matrix.
The workflow calculates QC statistics for ADT counts using `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` that are stored alongside the ADT by cell counts matrix in the filtered `SingleCellExperiment` object.
The `SingleCellExperiment` object containing the filtered RNA and ADT counts matrix and associated ADT QC statistics is saved to an `.rds` file with the suffix `_filtered.rds`.

The ADT by cell counts matrix is normalized by first determining the ambient profile and then using that profile to calculate median size factors with `scuttle::computeMedianFactors()` [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.scuttle; @url:https://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.advanced/integrating-with-protein-abundance.html#cite-seq-median-norm].
We skip normalization for cells with low-quality ADT expression, as indicated by `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`.
Although `scpca-nf` normalizes ADT counts, the workflow does not perform any dimensionality reduction of ADT data; only the RNA counts data is used as input for dimensionality reduction.
The normalized ADT data is saved as an `altExp` within the processed `SingleCellExperiment` containing the normalized RNA data and is output to an `.rds` file with the suffix `_processed.rds`.
All `.rds` files containing `SingleCellExperiment` objects and associated `altExp` objects are converted to `AnnData` objects and exported as separate RNA (`_rna.hdf5`) and ADT (`_adt.hdf5`) `AnnData` objects.

If a library contains associated ADT data, the QC report output by `scpca-nf` will include an additional section with a summary of ADT-related statistics, such as how many cells express each ADT, and ADT-specific diagnostic plots (Figure {@fig:figs2}B-D).
As mentioned above, `scpca-nf` uses `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` to calculate QC statistics for each cell using ADT expression but does not filter any cells from the object.
We include plots summarizing the removal of low-quality cells based on RNA and ADT counts in the QC report (Figure {@fig:figs2}B).
The first quadrant indicates which cells would be kept if the object was filtered on both RNA and ADT.
The other facets highlight which cells would be removed if filtering was done using only RNA counts, only ADT counts, or both.
The top four ADTs with the most variable expression are also identified and visualized using density plots to show the normalized ADT expression across all cells (Figure {@fig:figs2}C) and UMAPs – calculated from RNA data – with cells colored by ADT expression (Figure {@fig:figs2}D).

### Multiplexed libraries

To process multiplexed libraries, the HTO FASTQ files are input to `scpca-nf` and quantified using `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` (Figure {@fig:figs2}C).
Along with the FASTQ files, `scpca-nf` requires two TSV files to process multiplexed data: one to build an HTO-specific index for quantifying HTO expression with `alevin-fry`, and a second to indicate which HTO was used for which sample when multiplexing the library.
The unfiltered HTO by cell counts matrix output from `alevin-fry` is saved as an alternative experiment (`altExp`) within the main `SingleCellExperiment` containing the unfiltered RNA counts.
This `SingleCellExperiment` object containing both RNA and HTO counts is output from the workflow to an `.rds` file with the suffix `_unfiltered.rds`.

As with ADT data, `scpca-nf` does not filter any cells based on HTO expression, and any cells removed after filtering empty droplets based on the unfiltered RNA counts matrix are also removed from the HTO counts matrix and saved to an `.rds` file with the `_filtered.rds` suffix.
`scpca-nf` does not perform any additional filtering or processing of the HTO by cell counts matrix, so the same filtered matrix is saved to the processed `.rds` file with the `_processed.rds` suffix.

Although `scpca-nf` quantifies the HTO data and includes an HTO by cell counts matrix in all objects, `scpca-nf` does not demultiplex the samples into one sample per library.
Instead, `scpca-nf` applies multiple demultiplexing methods, including demultiplexing with `DropletUtils::hashedDrops()` [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.DropletUtils], demultiplexing with `Seurat::HTODemux()` [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1], and genetic demultiplexing when bulk RNA-seq data is available.
`scpca-nf` uses the genetic demultiplexing method described in Weber et al. [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab062], which uses bulk RNA-seq as a reference for the expected genotypes found in each single-cell RNA-seq sample.
The results from all available demultiplexing methods are saved in the filtered and processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects.

If a library has associated HTO data, an additional section is included in the `scpca-nf` QC report.
This section summarizes HTO-specific library statistics, such as how many cells express each HTO.
No additional plots are produced, but a table summarizing the results from all three demultiplexing methods is included.

### Bulk and spatial transcriptomics

Multiple libraries were collected for some samples, with the additional libraries being used for bulk RNA-seq and/or spatial transcriptomics.
Both of these additional sequencing methods are supported by `scpca-nf`.
To quantify bulk RNA-seq data, `scpca-nf` takes bulk FASTQ files as input, trims reads using `fastp` [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560], and then aligns reads with `salmon` (Figure {@fig:figs3}A) [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197].
The output is a single TSV file with the gene by sample counts matrix for all samples in a given ScPCA project.
This gene by sample matrix is only included with project downloads on the Portal.

To quantify spatial transcriptomics data, `scpca-nf` takes the RNA FASTQ and slide image as input (Figure {@fig:figs3}B).
As there is not yet support for spatial transcriptomics with `alevin-fry`, `scpca-nf` uses Space Ranger to quantify all spatial transcriptomics data [@url:https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/space-ranger/latest].
The output includes the spot by gene matrix along with a summary report produced by Space Ranger.

## Downloading projects from the ScPCA Portal

<!-- TODO:
⚠️ JNT thinks this level of repetition of facts covered in earlier sections is good.
See what you think during your review.
-->
On the Portal, users can select to download data from individual samples or all data from an entire ScPCA project.
When downloading data for an entire project, users can choose between receiving the individual files for each sample (default) or one file containing the gene expression data and metadata for all samples in the project as a merged object.
Users also have the option to choose their desired format and receive the data as `SingleCellExperiment` (`.rds`) or `AnnData` (`.hdf5`) objects.

For downloads with samples as individual files, the download folder will include a sub-folder for each sample in the project (Figure {@fig:fig3}A).
Each sample folder contains all three object types (unfiltered, filtered, and processed) as either `SingleCellExperiment` (`.rds`) or `AnnData` (`.hdf5`) objects and the QC and cell type summary report for all libraries from the given sample.
The objects house the summarized gene expression data and associated metadata for the library indicated in the filename.

All project downloads include a metadata file, `single_cell_metadata.tsv`, containing relevant metadata for all samples, and a `README.md` with information about the contents of each download, contact and citation information, and terms of use for data downloaded from the Portal (Figure {@fig:fig3}A-B).
If the ScPCA project includes samples with bulk RNA-seq, two additional files are included: a gene by sample counts matrix (`bulk_quant.tsv`) with the quantified gene expression data for all samples in the project, and a metadata file (`bulk_metadata.tsv`).

### Merged objects

Providing data for all samples within a single file facilitates performing joint gene-level analyses, such as differential expression or gene set enrichment analyses, on multiple samples simultaneously.
Therefore, we provide a single, merged object for each project containing all raw and normalized gene expression data and most metadata for all single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq libraries within a given ScPCA project.
We provide merged objects for all projects in the Portal except for those with multiplexing due to potential ambiguity in identifying samples.
The data in the merged object has simply been combined, and no batch-corrected or integrated data is included.
If downloading data from an ScPCA project as a single, merged file, the download will include a single `.rds` or `.hdf5` file, a summary report for the merged object, and a folder with all individual QC and cell type reports for each library found in the merged object (Figure {@fig:fig3}B).

To build the merged objects, we created an additional stand-alone workflow for merging the output from `scpca-nf`, `merge.nf` (Figure {@fig:fig3}C).
`merge.nf` takes as input the processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects output by `scpca-nf` for all single-cell and single-nuclei libraries included in a given ScPCA project.
The gene expression data stored in all `SingleCellExperiment` objects are then merged to produce a single merged gene by cell counts matrix containing all cells from all libraries and all shared genes.
The genes available in the merged object will be the same as those in each individual object, as all objects on the Portal were quantified using the same index.
Where possible, library-, cell- and gene-specific metadata found in the individual processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects are also merged.
The merged normalized counts matrix is then used to select high-variance genes in a library-aware manner before performing dimensionality reduction with both PCA and UMAP.
`merge.nf` outputs the merged and processed object as a `SingleCellExperiment` object.

We also account for additional modalities in `merge.nf`.
If at least one library in a project contains ADT data, the raw and normalized ADT data are also merged and saved as an `altExp` in the merged `SingleCellExperiment` object.
If any libraries in a project are multiplexed, no merged object is created, as there is no guarantee that a unique HTO was used for each sample in a given project, making it difficult to identify which HTO corresponds to which sample in a merged object.
All merged `SingleCellExperiment` objects are converted to `AnnData` objects and exported as `.hdf5` files.
If the merged object contains an `altExp` with merged ADT data, two `AnnData` objects are exported to create separate RNA (`_rna.hdf5`) and ADT (`_adt.hdf5`) objects.

`merge.nf` outputs a summary report for each merged object, which includes a set of tables summarizing the types of samples and libraries included in the project, such as types of diagnosis, and a faceted UMAP showing all cells from all libraries.
In the UMAP, each panel represents a different library included in the merged object, with all cells from the specified library shown in color, while all other cells are gray.
An example of this UMAP showing a subset of libraries from an ScPCA project is available in Figure {@fig:fig3}D.

## Annotating cell types

Assigning cell type labels to single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data is often an essential step in analysis.
Cell type annotation requires knowledge of the expected cell types in a dataset and the associated gene expression patterns for each cell type, which is available in publications or other public databases for some biological contexts.
Automated cell type annotation methods leveraging public databases are an excellent initial step in the labeling process, as they can be applied consistently and transparently across all samples in a data set.
As such, we include cell type annotations determined using two different automated methods, `SingleR` [@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y] and `CellAssign` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1], in all processed `SingleCellExperiment` and `AnnData` objects available for download on the Portal, saving users analysis time.

Annotating cell types with automated methods like `SingleR` and `CellAssign` requires references, either in the form of an annotated gene expression dataset, either from a microarray, bulk RNA-seq, or single-cell RNA-seq experiment, or matrix of cell types and expected marker genes.
Most public annotated reference datasets that can be used with these methods –  including those we use for the Portal – are derived from normal tissue, making annotating tumor datasets particularly difficult.
Because there are limitations to the annotations provided on the Portal, comparing the two methods and observing consistent cell type annotations across methods can indicate higher confidence in the provided labels.
For some ScPCA projects, submitters provided their own curated cell type annotations, including annotation of tumor cells and disease-specific cell states.
These submitter-provided annotations can be found in all `SingleCellExperiment` and `AnnData` objects (unfiltered, filtered, and processed).

### Choosing cell typing methods and references

`SingleR` is a reference-based annotation method that requires an existing bulk or single-cell RNA-seq dataset with annotations.
To identify the most appropriate reference to use with `SingleR`, we annotated a small number of samples across multiple disease types with all human-specific references available in the `celldex` package [@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y].
The output from `SingleR` includes a score matrix containing a score for each cell and all possible cell types found in the reference, where higher scores are associated with assigned cell types.
We calculated the delta median statistic for each cell in the dataset by subtracting the median score from the score associated with the assigned cell type label.
The delta median statistic helps evaluate how confident `SingleR` is in assigning each cell to a specific cell type, where low delta median values indicate ambiguous assignments and high delta median values indicate confident assignments [@url:https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/annotation-diagnostics.html#based-on-the-deltas-across-cells].
<!-- TODO: ⚠️ For review - What do you think of the next sentence? -->
We found that the `BlueprintEncodeData` reference [@doi:10.3324/haematol.2013.094243; @doi:10.1038/nature11247], which includes a variety of normal cell types and provides both the human-readable cell name and cell ontology identifier [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/cl], tended to perform best or at least similarly to other references across samples from different disease types using this measure (Figure {@fig:figS4}).
Based on these findings, we used the `BlueprintEncodeData` reference to annotate cells from all libraries on the Portal, as using a single reference is potentially valuable for cross-project analyses.

In contrast, `CellAssign` is a marker-gene-based annotation method that requires a binary matrix with all cell types and all associated marker genes as the reference.
We utilized the list of marker genes available as part of `PanglaoDB` [@doi:10.1093/database/baz046] to construct organ-specific marker gene matrices with marker genes from all cell types listed for the specified organ.
Since many cancers may have infiltrating immune cells, all immune cells were included in each organ-specific reference.
For each ScPCA project, we provided the organ-specific marker gene matrix relevant to the disease and tissue type from which the sample was obtained (e.g., for brain tumors, we used a brain-specific marker gene matrix with all brain and immune cell types).
If `CellAssign` cannot find a likely cell type from the marker gene matrix, it does not assign a cell type.
Because we annotate cells from tumor samples using references containing only normal cells, we anticipate that many cells, particularly the tumor cells, may not have an exact match; reporting this to the end user is valuable.
Applying `CellAssign` to a few samples, we observed that many of the cells were unassigned.
We included an example in Figure {@fig:figS5}A where unassigned cell types are labeled with `Unknown`.
When comparing annotations obtained from `CellAssign` to submitter-provided annotations, we noticed the labels for non-tumor cells are similar between `CellAssign` and submitter annotations, while the tumor cells were not assigned using `CellAssign` (Figure {@fig:figS5}B).

### Adding cell type annotations to the ScPCA Portal

`scpca-nf` adds cell type annotations from `SingleR` and `CellAssign` to all processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects (Figure {@fig:fig4}A).
This requires two additional reference files as input to the workflow: a classification model built from a reference dataset for `SingleR` and a marker gene by cell type matrix for `CellAssign`.
`SingleR::trainSingleR()` was used to build a classification model from the provided `BlueprintEncodeData` dataset and create the required `SingleR` input for `scpca-nf`.
The classification model and processed `SingleCellExperiment` were used as input for `SingleR::classifySingleR()`, resulting in annotations for all cells and an associated score matrix.
The score matrix containing a score for all cells and each possible cell type and the assigned cell types are added to the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object output by `scpca-nf`.
Simultaneously, processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects are converted to `AnnData` objects for classification with `CellAssign`.
`CellAssign` uses the converted `AnnData` object and the marker gene matrix to train a model and predict the most likely cell type from the possible cell types in the marker gene matrix.
The prediction matrix, which contains a probability that each cell is one of each possible cell types, and the assigned cell types are added to the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object output by `scpca-nf`.
The processed `SingleCellExperiment` object is then converted to an `AnnData` object to ensure cell type annotations are included in both data formats provided by `scpca-nf`.

An additional cell type report with information about reference sources, comparisons among cell type annotation methods, and diagnostic plots is also output by `scpca-nf`.
Tables summarizing the number of cells assigned to each cell type for each method are shown alongside UMAPs coloring cells by the assigned cell type.
The concordance of cell type annotations assigned between both methods can indicate higher confidence in the provided annotations.
We therefore used the Jaccard similarity index to compare annotations between the two methods, as well as submitter-provided annotations, if available.
This index is calculated between pairs of labels from each method and ranges from 0-1, with a value close to 1 indicating high agreement and a high proportion of overlapping cells and values close to 0 indicating a low proportion of overlapping cells.
The Jaccard similarity index is displayed in a heatmap, an example of which is shown in Figure {@fig:fig4}B.

The report also includes a diagnostic plot evaluating the confidence of cell type annotations determined by each method.
To evaluate confidence in `SingleR` cell type annotations, the delta median statistic is calculated by subtracting the median score from the score associated with the assigned cell type label [@url:https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/annotation-diagnostics.html#based-on-the-deltas-across-cells].
The distribution of delta median values for each cell type is shown in the cell type report, where a higher delta median statistic for a cell indicates higher confidence in the final cell type annotation (Figure {@fig:figS6}A).
`CellAssign` calculates the probability that each cell belongs to each possible cell type provided in the reference, and the cell type label with the highest probability is assigned as the cell type for that cell.
<!-- TODO: What exactly do we mean by reliable labels? Labels that are appropriate for the dataset -->
These values range from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating greater confidence in a given cell type label, so we expect more confident labels to have most values close to 1.
An example of the plot included in the report displaying the distribution of all probabilities for each cell type is shown in Figure {@fig:figS6}B.

If the submitter provided cell types, the submitter annotations are compared to the annotations from both `SingleR` and `CellAssign`.
A summary of this comparison is included in the cell type report along with a table summarizing the submitter cell type annotations and a UMAP plot where each cell is colored by the submitter annotation.
The Jaccard similarity index is calculated for all pairs of cell type labels in submitter annotations and `SingleR` annotations and in submitter annotations and `CellAssign` annotations.
The results from both comparisons are displayed in a stacked heatmap available in the report, an example of which is shown in Figure {@fig:figS7}.



