## Materials and Methods

### Data generation and processing

Raw data and metadata were generated and compiled by each lab and institution contributing to the Portal.
Single-cell or single-nuclei libraries were generated using one of the commercially available kits from 10x Genomics.
For bulk RNA-seq, RNA was collected and sequenced using either paired-end or single-end sequencing.
For spatial transcriptomics, cDNA libraries were generated using the Visium kit from 10x Genomics.
All libraries were processed using our open-source pipeline, `scpca-nf`, to produce summarized gene expression data.

### Metadata

Submitters were required to submit the age, sex, organism, diagnosis, subdiagnosis (if applicable), and tissue of origin for each sample.
The submitted metadata was standardized across projects, including converting all ages to years, removing abbreviations used in diagnosis, subdiagnosis, or tissue of origin, and using standard values across projects as much as possible for diagnosis, subdiagnosis, disease timing, and tissue of origin.
For example, all samples obtained at diagnosis were assigned the value `Initial diagnosis` for disease timing.

In an effort to ensure sample metadata for ScPCA are compatible with CZI's CELLxGENE, ontology term identifiers were assigned to metadata categories for each sample following the guidelines present in the CELLxGENE schema [@url:https://cellxgene.cziscience.com; @url:https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md], as shown in Table {@tbl:metadata}.

| Metadata field   | Ontology term description             |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Age             | Ontology term obtained from HsapDv [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hsapdv]. For ages 0-11 months, the HsapDv for age in months was used. For ages 12 months and greater, the HsapDv for age in years was used. |
| Sex             | Ontology term obtained from PATO, either male (PATO:0000384), female (PATO:0000383), or unknown  [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/pato].  |
| Organism   | NCBI taxonomy term for organism. All current samples available on the Portal are from Homo sapiens or NCBITaxon:9606 [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy].|
| Diagnosis   | The most appropriate MONDO term based on the provided diagnosis [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/mondo]. An exact match was identified for most samples, but in a handful of cases, the most closely related term was used.  |
| Tissue of origin | The most appropriate UBERON term based on the provided tissue of origin [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/uberon]. An exact match was identified for most samples, but in a handful of cases, the most closely related term was used.  |
| Ethnicity (if applicable)  | If the submitter provided ethnicity, the associated Hancestro term [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hancestro]. If ethnicity is unavailable, `unknown` is used. |

Table: Assignment of metadata fields to ontology terms. {#tbl:metadata}

### Processing single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data with alevin-fry

To quantify RNA-seq gene expression for each cell or nucleus in a library, `scpca-nf` uses `salmon alevin` [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02151-8] and `alevin-fry`[@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] to generate a gene by cell counts matrix.
Prior to mapping, we generated an index using transcripts from both spliced cDNA and unspliced cDNA sequences, denoted as the `splici` index [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3].
The index was generated from the human genome, GRCh38, Ensembl version 104.
`salmon alevin` was run using selective alignment to the `splici` index with the `--rad` option to generate a reduced alignment data (RAD) file required for input to `alevin-fry`.

The RAD file was used as input to the recommended `alevin-fry` workflow, with the following customizations.
At the `generate-permit-list` step, we used the `unfiltered-pl` option to provide a list of expected barcodes specific to the 10x kit used to generate each library.
The `quant` step was run using the `cr-like-em` resolution strategy for feature quantification and UMI de-duplication.

### Post alevin-fry processing of single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data

The output from running `alevin-fry` includes a gene by cell counts matrix, with reads from both spliced and unspliced reads for all potential cell barcodes.
This output is read into R to create a `SingleCellExperiment` using `fishpond::load_fry()`.
The resulting `SingleCellExperiment` contains a `counts` assay with a gene by cell counts matrix where all spliced and unspliced reads for a given gene are totaled together.
We also include a `spliced` assay that contains a gene by cell counts matrix with only spliced reads.
These matrices include all potential cells, including empty droplets, and are provided for all Portal downloads in the unfiltered objects saved as `.rds` files with the `_unfiltered.rds` suffix.

Each droplet was tested for deviation from the ambient RNA profile using `DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger()` and those with an FDR ≤ 0.01 were retained as likely cells.
If a library did not have a sufficient number of droplets and `DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger()` failed, cells with fewer than 100 UMIs were removed.
Gene expression data for any cells that remain after filtering are provided in the filtered objects saved as `.rds` files with the `_filtered.rds` suffix.

In addition to removing empty droplets, `scpca-nf` also removes cells that are likely to be compromised by damage or low-quality sequencing.
`miQC` was used to calculate the posterior probability that each cell is compromised [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009290].
Any cells with a probability of being compromised greater than 0.75 and fewer than 200 genes detected were removed before further processing.
The gene expression counts from the remaining cells were log-normalized using the deconvolution method from Lun, Bach, and Marioni [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0947-7].
`scran::modelGeneVar()` was used to model gene variance from the log-normalized counts and `scran::getTopHVGs()` was used to select the top 2000 high-variance genes.
These were used as input to calculate the top 50 principal components using `scater::runPCA()`.
Finally, UMAP embeddings were calculated from the principal components with `scater::runUMAP()`.
The raw and log-normalized counts, list of 2000 high-variance genes, principal components, and UMAP embeddings are all stored in the processed objects saved as `.rds` files with the `_processed.rds` suffix.

### Quantifying gene expression for libraries with CITE-seq or cell hashing

All libraries with antibody-derived tags (ADTs) or hashtag oligonucleotides (HTOs) were mapped to a reference index using `salmon alevin` and quantified using `alevin-fry`.
The reference indices were constructed using the `salmon index` command with the `--feature` option.
References were custom-built for each ScPCA project and constructed using the submitter-provided list of ADTs or HTOs and their barcode sequences.

The ADT by cell or HTO by cell counts matrix produced by `alevin-fry` were read into R as a `SingleCellExperiment` object and saved as an alternative experiment (`altExp`) in the same `SingleCellExperiment` object with the unfiltered gene expression counts data.
The `altExp` within the unfiltered object contains all identified ADTs or HTOs and all barcodes identified in the RNA-seq gene expression data.
Any barcodes that only appeared in either ADT or HTO data were discarded, and cell barcodes that were only found in the gene expression data (i.e., did not appear in the ADT or HTO data) were assigned zero counts for all ADTs and HTOs.
Any cells removed after filtering empty droplets were also removed from the ADT and HTO counts matrices and before creating the filtered `SingleCellExperiment` object.

### Processing ADT expression data from CITE-seq

The ADT count matrix stored in the unfiltered object was used to calculate an ambient profile with `DropletUtils::ambientProfileEmpty()`.
This ambient profile was used to calculate quality-control statistics with `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` for all cells remaining after removing empty droplets.
Any negative or isotype controls were taken into account when calculating QC statistics.
Cells with a high level of ambient contamination or negative/isotype controls were flagged as having low-quality ADT expression, but we did not remove any cells based on ADT quality from the object.
The filtered and processed objects contain the results from running `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`.

ADT count data were then normalized by calculating median size factors using the ambient profile with `scuttle::computeMedianFactors()`.
If median-based normalization failed for any reason, ADT counts were log-transformed after adding a pseudocount of 1.
Normalized counts are only available for any cells that would be retained after ADT filtering, and any cells that would be filtered out based on `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` are assigned `NA`.
The normalized ADT data are available in the `altExp` of the processed object.

### Processing HTO data from multiplexed libraries

Although we did not perform any demultiplexing of samples within a multiplexed library, we did apply three different demultiplexing methods.
Results from all three methods are included in the filtered and processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects along with the HTO counts data.

#### Genetic demultiplexing

If all samples in a multiplexed library were also sequenced using bulk RNA-seq, we performed genetic demultiplexing using genotype data from both bulk RNA-seq and single-cell or single-nuclei RNA-seq [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab062].
If bulk RNA-seq was not available, no genetic demultiplexing was performed.

Bulk RNA-seq reads for each sample were mapped to a reference genome using `STAR` [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635], and multiplexed single-cell or single-nuclei RNA-seq reads were mapped to the same reference genome using `STARsolo`[@doi:10.1101/2021.05.05.442755].
The mapped bulk reads were used to call variants and assign genotypes with `bcftools mpileup` [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab008].
`cellsnp-lite` was then used to genotype single-cell data at the identified sites found in the bulk RNA-seq data [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btab358].
Finally, `vireo` was used to identify the sample of origin [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btab358].

#### HTO demultiplexing

For all multiplexed libraries, we performed demultiplexing using `DropletUtils::hashedDrops()` and `Seurat::HTODemux()`.
For both methods, we used the default parameters and only performed demultiplexing on the filtered cells present in the filtered object.
The results from both these methods are available in the filtered and processed objects.

### Quantification of spatial transcriptomics data

10x Genomics' Space Ranger [@url:https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/space-ranger/latest] was used to quantify gene expression data from spatial transcriptomics libraries.
`cellranger mkref` was used to create a reference index from the human genome, GRCh38, Ensembl version 104.
The FASTQ files, microscopic slide image, and slide serial number were provided as input to `spaceranger count`.
The raw and filtered counts matrix and the summary report output by `spaceranger count` are included in the folder output from `scpca-nf`.

### Quantification of bulk RNA-seq data

`fastp` was used to trim adaptors and perform quality and length filtering on all FASTQ files from bulk RNA-seq.
We used a decoy-aware reference created from spliced cDNA sequences with the entire human genome sequence (GRCh38, Ensembl version 104) as the decoy [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197].
The trimmed reads were then provided as input to `salmon quant` for selective alignment.
In addition to using the default parameters for `salmon quant`, we applied the `--seqBias` and `--gcBias` flags to correct for sequence-specific biases due to random hexamer priming and fragment-level GC biases, respectively.

### Cell type annotation

Cell type labels determined by both `SingleR`[@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y] and `CellAssign`[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1] were added to processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects.
If cell types were obtained from the submitter of the dataset, the submitter-provided annotations were incorporated into all `SingleCellExperiment` objects (unfiltered, filtered, and processed).

To prepare the references used for assigning cell types, we developed a separate workflow `build-celltype-index.nf` within `scpca-nf`.
For `SingleR`, we used the `BlueprintEncodeData` from the `celldex` package [@doi:10.3324/haematol.2013.094243; @doi:10.1038/nature11247] to train the `SingleR` classification model with `SingleR::trainSingleR()`.
In the main `scpca-nf` workflow, this model and the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object were input to `SingleR::classifySingleR()`.
The `SingleR` output of cell type annotations and a score matrix for each cell and all possible cell types were added to the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object output.
To evaluate confidence in `SingleR` cell type assignments, we also calculated a delta median statistic for each cell by subtracting the median cell type score from the score associated with the assigned cell type [@url:https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/annotation-diagnostics.html#based-on-the-deltas-across-cells].

For `CellAssign`, marker gene references were created using the marker gene lists available on `PanglaoDB` [@doi:10.1093/database/baz046].
Organ-specific references were built using all cell types in a specified organ listed in `PanglaoDB` to accommodate all ScPCA projects encompassing a variety of disease and tissue types.
If a set of disease types in a given project encompassed cells that may be present in multiple organ groups, multiple organs were combined.
For example, we created a reference containing bone, connective tissue, smooth muscle, and immune cells for sarcomas that appear in bone or soft tissue.

Given the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object and organ-specific reference, `scvi.external.CellAssign` was used in the main `scpca-nf` workflow to train the model and predict the assigned cell type.
For each cell, `CellAssign` calculates a probability of assignment to each cell type in the reference.
The probability matrix and a prediction based on the most probable cell type were added as cell type annotations to the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object output.

### Generating merged data

Merged objects are created with the `merge.nf` workflow within `scpca-nf`.
This workflow takes as input the processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects in a given ScPCA project output by `scpca-nf` and creates a single merged `SingleCellExperiment` object containing gene expression data and metadata from all libraries in that project.
The merged object includes both raw and normalized counts for all cells from all libraries.
Because the same reference index was used to quantify all single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data, the set of genes is the same in the merged object and the individual objects.
Library-, cell- and gene-specific metadata from each of the processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects are also combined and stored in the merged object.
The `merge.nf` workflow does not perform batch-correction or integration.
The counts in the merged object are therefore not batch-corrected.

The top 2000 shared high-variance genes are identified from the merged counts matrix by modeling variance using `scran::modelGeneVar()` and specifying library IDs for the `block` argument.
These genes are used to calculate library-aware principal components with `batchelor::multiBatchPCA()`.
The top 50 principal components were selected and used to calculate UMAP embeddings for the merged object.

If any libraries included in the ScPCA project contain additional ADT data, the ADT data are also merged and stored in the `altExp` slot of the merged `SingleCellExperiment` object.
By contrast, if any libraries included in the ScPCA project are multiplexed and contain HTO data, no merged object is created.

### Converting SingleCellExperiment objects to AnnData objects

`zellkonverter::writeH5AD()` was used to convert `SingleCellExperiment` objects to `AnnData` format and export the objects as `.hdf5` files.
For any `SingleCellExperiment` objects containing an `altExp` (e.g., ADT data), the RNA and ADT data were exported and saved separately as RNA (`_rna.hdf5`) and ADT (`_adt.hdf5`) files.
Multiplexed libraries were not converted to `AnnData` objects, due to the potential for ambiguity in sample origin assignments.

All merged `SingleCellExperiment` objects were converted to `AnnData` objects and saved as `.hdf5` files.
If a merged `SingleCellExperiment` object contained any ADT data, the RNA and ADT data were exported and saved separately as RNA (`_rna.hdf5`) and ADT (`_adt.hdf5`) objects.
In contrast, if a merged `SingleCellExperiment` object contained HTO data due to the presence of any multiplexed libraries in the merged object, the HTO data was removed from the `SingleCellExperiment` object and not included in the exported `AnnData` object.
